Once around jumbos.
So there was a James Webb Space
Telescope survey which was published
earlier in this uh last 12 months and it
was looking into the core of the Orion
Nebula. 35 hours of telescope time using
the near cam near infrared camera
looking right into the core of the
trapezium cluster which is in the
photograph there right in the center.
You can see the four bright stars and
all the lesser ones around it part of
the central region. And what they were
looking for was the signature of free
floating or rogue planets. planets that
are just moving through space not in
orbit around a parent star and in
particular looking for gas giants
Jupiter sized planets. There was a
always an issue with this in that we
were finding lots of stars of different
masses and even quite a few brown
dwarfs, but there was a sort of cutff
point below the size of a brown dwarf
where we weren't finding very much. And
it seemed likely that nature was
managing to make many of these gas giant
planets um just independently of their
uh parent stars or uh possibly being
ejected from orbits around the proto
stars during the star system formation
phase which can be quite chaotic. So it
seemed like a fertile ground for a
survey.
Well, the data from the infrared camera
was put through 12 different filters.
You can see in the bottom chart there,
the uh thing that looks like yellow
teeth along the bottom are the
bandwidths of the different infrared
filters. And by looking at these
particular wave bands, you can
essentially create a lowresolution
spectrum of the infrared light.
So we have the uh
light curves there with the points on
them corresponding to the filters and
you can see what we're detecting. And
then at the top there's a model of the
typical spectrum that you might ex might
might get um with infinite resolution
for
an object which might be a free floating
planet with water H2O with methane and
carbon monoxide
um CO and CH4 in the atmosphere there
and certainly it looks a little bit like
the
dip that we see for methane there is
being seen in the image and possibly the
water dip at the left hand side. Uh so
the shapes not a bad fit.
Well, the idea was to look for these
free floating planets by trying to
detect these molecules in the
atmospheres there, looking at regions
and seeing if there were places where we
could spot an excess of these molecular
signatures.
Interesting way of finding planets. and
they found 540 of them, which is quite a
big uh hall for a fairly modest region
within the core of the Orion Nebula,
solving that problem and suggesting that
actually yes, we do get a lot of these.
But interestingly, of those 540, 9% of
them were binaries or triplets. I think
this the numbers were 40 binaries and
two triplets that we seem to have
detected. And the binaries go by the
name of Jupiter mass binary objects or
jumbos. You've got to have a good
acronym, haven't you? So, these are
pairs of planet mass objects in orbit
around each other with no parent star.
And the bottom picture is an artist's
rendition of what that might look like
if you were to get up close. And the
detection in the image is shown in
summary at the top there with jumbo 033
in the uh center on the right hand side
there.
Now these objects are somewhere in the
range 890 to 2520
Kelvin. So, that's uh warm. Well, pretty
hot, actually. 900° is uh getting fairly
hot. Uh but 2,500 is not quite red hot,
which would be about 3,000.
And these are the sort of temperatures
you get increasing in temperature with
increasing mass for these uh subdwarfs
these Jupiter mass objects
somewhere between 7 and 13 Jupiter
masses. U for reference Saturn is about
33 of a Jupiter mass. So this is
slightly smaller than Jupiter up to
considerably larger. But the upper bound
of 13 is set as a hard limit. Anything
greater than 13 times the mass of
Jupiter, we class as a brown dwarf all
the way up to 75 times um when we think
that nuclear fusion would be initiated
and you would get a red dwarf, a low
mass star. So, brown dwarfs in that 13
to 75
MJ region. Anything below 13 MJ is
classed as a subdwarf planet. Um, a gas
giant if you like. Uh, and uh, that's
certainly where we found these jumbos,
these Jupiter mass binary objects to be.
Now, the question is where do these
things come from? Are they formed just
like stars in situ on their own
self-gravity pulling little knots of
material in the nebula together? Um, or
perhaps
they're too small for that. Perhaps
there are too many binaries. It did seem
like 9% turning up as binaries was too
many for that sort of formation.
Now the other way that they might get
created is in orbit around a star as we
think occurred in our solar system for
our giant planets. And in fact, we have
simulations that suggest we possibly
started with a total of five gas giant
planets and that one was subject to a
gravitational slingshot and hurled out
due to a close encounter in the chaos of
the early solar system. And so may be
out in deep space somewhere still within
the gravitational reach of the sun or
perhaps even ejected entirely from the
sun's reach and lost forever.
Well,
that's certainly a possibility for free
floating planets. Um, some people have
suggested that near misses with another
star might rip planets out of orbit as
well, but such things are probably
rather rare. And either of those two
seem unlikely as a source of creating
binaries.
So neither of these or none of these
possible formation routes seem to fit
with creating these binaries. Either
because there are too many of them or
the objects are too small or um because
the creating a binary that way just
doesn't make any sense.
Well, from what we found from the
separation between the binaries,
anything from about 28 to 384
AU astronomical units, that's the
Earth's sun distance. So, Neptune is 30
AU from the Sun. So, this is from the
orbit of Neptune out to uh 10 or 15
times that. And that actually fits with
some of the theory about how such things
might occur.
um trying to form them in tighter orbits
is more difficult and trying to form
them further away from each other and
end up as binaries is also difficult for
different reasons. If they were too
close to each other, it'd be hard to
build two large objects because the
accretion discs of material infalling to
build them up would tend to touch and so
you'd end up with them spiraling into
each other. And if they were too far
apart, it's hard to see how they would
remain bound due to perturbations from
many other objects. So this seems to be
in the ballpark.
So now the radio telescopes got in on
the act. The VA, the very large array
out there in the desert, those uh
triangularly arranged dishes, started
looking for these objects and mapping
them and detected radio emissions in the
6 to 10 gigahertz bands,
suggestive of charged particles in
trapped uh bands caused by magnetic
fields around these objects, much as we
see radio emissions from Jupiter.
So, it seemed reasonable. And the map at
the top there is the radio map homing in
on Jumbo 24 and the white square in the
center. That's where we think uh Jumbo
24 was. So, it seems well centered on
it. And we're thinking that jumbo 24
might be a pair of quite large 11.5
Jupiter mass objects just 28 aus apart.
So close and on the large side. And of
course that's what happens when you
first go looking for things. You find
the ones that are easy to find.
We also were able to confirm jumbo 29.
And this is actually an optical image of
Jumbo 29. The two objects there, the
bright one at mass 12.5 Jupiter masses
and its smaller three Jupiter mass
companion there 135 AU apart orbiting
around each other. Now the larger one is
pretty much on that limit. It's almost
large enough to be classed as a brown
dwarf. Um, and that makes sense because
the larger the object, the more gravity
it has, so the more it's able to hang on
to a uh an orbiting companion. So that
sort of fits with uh theory quite
nicely.
Um now what's interesting is that when
we look at other clusters such as the
upper scorpius cluster region just uh
above the uh star clouds in offucus
there um all of those individual little
red circles those are free floating
rogue planets uh Jupiter mass planets
that have been found but we couldn't
find any of them being jumbos no
binaries.
Now, this particular
cluster, nebula, whatever you want to
call it, is considerably older than the
Orion Nebula where the jumbos were
found. And that might make sense because
being older, there's been that much more
time for gravitational evolution and the
spreading out of the stars of the new
star cluster. and indeed the free
floating planets and also more time for
them to have had gravitational
interactions and get hurled out and
indeed disrupted as binaries because we
do think that gravitational slingshot
tends to disrupt binary pairs to the
extent that theory tells us we should
have lost 98% of the binary pairs in the
first 10 million years. So maybe that's
why we're not seeing any in this older
cluster. Whereas the Orion Nebula being
much much younger than 10 million years,
more like 1 million years, maybe even
200,000 years since the Jumbos were
formed. Uh it's entirely possible that
uh we're still seeing some. But in a
paper just published in December of
2024, Lumen at Al suggested that maybe
the interpretation is wrong. Uh so
there's more work to do on this one. The
detection images over on the right hand
side. The Lumen and his collaborators
went through them looking at them in a
different way, looking at the spectrum
and the light in more detail. And they
found that poor old Jumbo 24 that the VA
had homeed in on seems to be actually a
red dwarf star in the background
being seen through the dust of the Orion
Nebula making it look redder and
creating that illusion in the spectrum.
And that uh well the whole list of
others there numbers 3, five, six and so
on were also background sources shining
through the nebula.
And he also stated that 26 of the
remaining 40 uh of the total of 40
rather were too faint for the analysis
to really be effective. So it knocked
the total down to only around 10 that uh
were not either deemed impossible to
tell or completely ruled out.
So actually that's divided the total
from 40 down to 10 which makes more
sense in terms of the numbers of
surviving binaries given the young age
of the cluster. So not so many jumbos
out there in space as we thought. So,
thanks very much for listening to that
one and I'll hope you enjoyed it.